+++
date = "2018-03-16"
title = "Introducing Eclipse fog05"
description = "16 March 2018"
menu = "blog"
weight = 999
+++

Fog computing aims at providing horizontal, system-level, abstractions to distribute computing, storage, control and networking
functions closer to the user along a cloud-to-thing continuum. Whilst fog computing is increasingly recognised as the key paradigm
at the foundation of Consumer and Industrial Internet of Things (IoT), most of the initiatives on fog computing focus on extending
cloud infrastructure.

As a consequence, these infrastructure fall short in addressing heterogeneity and resource constraints characteristics of fog
computing environments.

## Eclipse fog05
**Eclipse fog05** defines a set of abstractions to unify the compute, storage and communication fabric end-to-end and thus allow applications
to be managed, monitored and orchestrated across the cloud to thing continuum.

The abstraction used by **fog05** to provision, manage and orchestrate applications, or network functions, is the entity.
An entity is defined as either an atomic entity, such as a Virtual Machine, a container, a Unikernel, a binary executable,
or a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) of entities (see Figure 1). Where the set of atomic entities supported by **fog05** can be extended
through plugins.

Entities and Atomic Entities have a FSM that defines the legal state transitions. These FSM have been defined to be sufficiently
generic to encompass essentially any kind of atomic entity ranging from a VM to a binary executable. Entities may define a
deployment affinity w.r.t. to each other as well as with respect to compute, storage, I/O and accelerators such GPUs and FPGAs.